---
lang: en
uses_forms: true
title: '6. Where Will You Say It? '
subtitle: 'Identifying the Best Platform '
image:
  url: ''
  caption: ''
published: false

---
There are dozens of ways of communicating with people, and all have their own pros and cons. Print media reaches a large audience, but the message cannot be tailored to specific audiences. It also tends to skew toward an older and literate audience. Radio is a great option for reaching people with low literacy, but the audience must fall within broadcasting range. Broadcast media (TV) reaches large audiences, but it may be difficult to get coverage, advertisements may be expensive, or the gatekeepers might be hostile to your cause. Social media allows for one-on-one interactions and wider discussions, but skews younger and for those with internet access or smartphones. Door-to-door contact can be individually targeted and highly persuasive, but it is time consuming and may be viewed with suspicion in some neighborhoods or contexts.

Depending on your goals and audiences, some tools and platforms are better than others, and their strengths and weaknesses are important to take into account when planning how you’ll deliver your messages. Whatever you choose, be sure it will reach your target audiences with maximum impact.

## Website 

Your organizational website is the place that interested people will come looking for information about your mission, work, activities, and how they can get involved to support your cause. Your website is often the way you present your organization to the digital world, and it should be designed and maintained with that in mind.

People arriving at your website should have an immediate sense of both the work of the organization and its “personality”. Is the organization tech-focused? Focused on people? Serious or humorous? Experts or novices? All of these answers will be reflected in both the design and content of the site.

If you’re organization does not currently have a website, the following are initial steps and ideas to consider:

* **What do you need your website to convey and to whom?** Most people will spend less than 10 seconds on your website -- what do you want them to learn or do in that 10 seconds? Make the most important or most requested information easy to find and access. For example, if you are trying to boost your credibility or make your expertise clear, how will you present yourself as professionals and experts in both the design and content you choose to present? 
* **Look at websites of similar groups** -- in your country or abroad. What do you like and dislike about those sites? What does the design and content say about their values, work, and mission? How can you tell that they are credible experts? What content do they prioritize and what do they make hard to find? 
* **Look at other popular websites from fields unrelated to yours**. Civil society organizations can learn a lot by studying the ways that business or media sites are set up -- groups with more resources that spend a lot of time and effort examining usage analytics and honing their websites in response. Ask yourself those same questions about the other sites -- what do you like and dislike? How do the design and content work together to convey values, work, and mission? How do they lay out their information so it’s easy to access and draws in the audience so they spend more time on the site?
* **Design your website based on what you know about your target audiences and what you learned from researching other websites.** Websites can range from the very simple to the very complex. There is no single best practice for websites; instead the complexity, look, feel, and function should all be decided based on who you are trying to reach and what you want to say to them. If you decide that you need a simple landing page without much more than a mission statement and a mechanism to collect emails, you can likely design that yourself using any number of free or cheap tools. If you need a very complex site with lots of information, multimedia integration, and complex logic, you may need to hire an experienced web developer.
* **Consider the security and sustainability of your website.** Consult with technical professionals to ensure you are making website design and development decisions that will allow your organization to maintain the availability and integrity of its site. A website that is hacked, taken down, or poorly maintained can have a negative impact on your organization and its reputation. Even if you are working with an external web developer for the initial build of your website, it is important to ensure that it is designed in a way that your organization can maintain over time and that you have an in-house technical expert(s) who can be responsible for updating the website after it is completed. Your organization should ensure that any decisions taken about the level of complexity, programming language and/or platform to use for web development is one that these in-house experts will be able to easily utilize to make any needed modifications or updates after the site is delivered.

If your organization already has a website, you should still review if its design and content meets your goals. This includes:

* **Evaluate it critically.** Does the homepage immediately convey the most important information? Do the design elements reflect your current branding and convey the tone and personality of your organization? Is the site’s messaging aligned with your frame and topline message? Is it easy to find the information most critical to your audiences? Has the website been updated with the most recent statements, photos, and content? How does your site look when accessed in the ways your audience is most likely to access it (i.e. mobile or desktop, internet speed, etc.)? Do all the links work? Are other design elements wonky or broken? Is it accessible to those with visual or hearing impairments? 
* **Protect your website from trolls, viruses, hackers, or other harmful actors.** Make sure your site has a Secure Socket Layer (SSL) certificate to encrypt any data sent and received by users to your site (such as personal details submitted via contact forms or credit card information, if you accept payments to your site). If you are concerned about adversaries taking down your website via a distributed denial of service attack (DDOS), consider setting up advanced protection through products such as Cloudflare or Google’s Project Shield. 
* **Look at your Google Analytics.** (See next section if you have not yet set up Google Analytics on your website). How are people traveling through the site? What pages are most popular and does that match with the content you want to prioritize? What pages are people exiting the site from most often? How long are people staying on the site? What kind of devices or internet browsers are they using to access your site?
* **Make adjustments as needed**. After examining all the data and answering the questions posed above, you may find that you only need to make just a few minor changes to your site to ensure it is accomplishing your goals. Or, you may need to make substantial changes or redesign it altogether. That can feel daunting, but if your website does not reflect your mission and isn’t set up to help you achieve your goals, it is worth the time and effort to correct it.

**Ensure that your website adheres to the EU General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) and any other such international requirements that are in effect.**

### _Maintenance_

As you’re designing or redesigning your website, keep in mind that you’ll need to keep it up-to-date and have a realistic plan for who will conduct maintenance and how they’ll do it. If you have limited staff time and resources, do not include a feature that needs to be updated daily. If your staff has a low technical expertise, do not choose a web platform that requires a lot of technical expertise to maintain.

### _Building Traffic_

Once you have a website that you are proud of and that conveys exactly what you want it to convey, you have to get people to visit it. Just building it and putting it live does not mean people will find it or go to it. Think about how you will drive traffic to your website. Some ideas include:

* **Tell people.** Email your list and tell them to visit your website. Post the link to social media. Include it on your printed materials. If you are being interviewed in the media, always include your web address for how people can learn more about you.
* **Update your site frequently with relevant information**. Having new content that is relevant to your work will help your search rankings and help people find your site when they search for it.
* **Pay for advertising.** Google Ads will place your website at the top of the list for relevant searches of keywords you choose. This is a great way to find new audiences that are interested in your work and content at exactly the time they are most interested in it. If you cannot afford Google Ads, you may be able to qualify for a Google grant depending on the mission and work of your organization. You can also consider ad networks or social media ads, where you can advertise your website to audiences based on demographics or interests or even specific email addresses, which can be useful when you are trying to expose your work to specific target audiences.

## Email

Often, the best emails are short and eye-catching. If you are doing outreach to a small group of influentials or to an individual, be sure to personalize your emails and keep them short to ensure they’re read. Be clear if you are asking for a response or action and how your recipients can carry that out. Put the ask as close to the top of your email as you can so people skimming through quickly see what you’re asking of them.

If you have the design capability to include graphics or gifs in your email, do it (unless it takes away from your message). Whenever possible do not include an attached document - summarize the findings of the document in the body of the email and then post a link to the full report as posted on your website. This avoids your email from being labeled as spam and you will also get data on who clicked through the email, how much time they spent on the landing page, and other important metrics.

Unlike the content you post to social media, email is not regulated by an algorithm. Everyone that you send an email to will receive it and have the opportunity to open and engage with it. This lack of gatekeeping is powerful, and organizations often rely on email if social media algorithms are keeping important content from their audiences. However, this strategy does rely on a strong email list. Think through how you plan to build your list, where those addresses will come from, how much money or time you can devote to paid list growth (if any), and how you will replenish your (inevitable) unsubscribers. When building your list, be intentional that those people on your list are from your target audiences and that your email strategy is in service to meeting your communications goals.

There are a number of free or cheap mass email systems you can use that also give good data on open rates, click through rates, and unsubscribe rates, so you can learn from your email blasts and continue to improve your content and tone. Those mass email platforms will also allow you to personalize blast emails -- an effective tactic for higher open and engagement rates. By adding the person’s first name into the email text, or other custom fields like polling place, local legislator, or electoral district number, your email recipients will feel a personal connection to your organization and receive necessary information without extra steps.

### _Email Security_

Develop and update an email security plan. Be sure you are using an email provider that offers two-factor authentication to prevent hacking of your organization’s email accounts. Require staff to use strong, complex passwords and avoid using the same password for multiple accounts. Passwords should be changed periodically. Emails that contain sensitive information about your work or contain personally identifiable information (PII) may require additional security considerations.

## Closed Messaging Services

Even those who don’t have reliable internet access or don’t use social media will likely be able to send and receive SMS messages. This can be a powerful platform for communicating with people who are otherwise hard to reach. As with email, the strength of your SMS program relies on the strength of your list. How will you collect and securely store phone numbers and have people opt-in to receiving SMS messages?

You can ask people to give their mobile numbers when they sign in at events, press conferences, and donor meetings, when they sign up on your website, or as an action in an email or social media post. You can also create opt-in, public groups or channels on WhatsApp or Telegram where people can find you and request updates by SMS message. Ensure that any PII is stored securely and in accordance with local data protection laws. If possible, use an encrypted cloud-based service such as GSuite or Microsoft365, rather than a local server, to securely store data.

SMS is immediate and intimate in a way that other forms of communication are not. It can be a useful tool for fast and frequent updates such as on election day. It is also good for rapid responses -- if you need people to turn out to an event that day or push back against disinformation quickly, you’ll be glad you took the time to build a robust SMS program. Platforms like Hustle also allow you to send out personalized mass SMS messages. Much like with emails, your audience is more likely to respond positively to customized messaging and responses.

If the contents of your communications are sensitive, though, keep in mind that SMS is not a secure communication tool. For sensitive communications, opt instead for an end-to-end encrypted messaging service like WhatsApp or Signal. Keep in mind that WhatsApp has a limit on the number of participants in each group. These kinds of private messaging applications facilitate peer-to-peer messaging and organized message groups to help you expand your reach and create a more engaged community. For example, if your organization is not well known or has not yet built up trust with your audience, but you have recruited a dedicated group of supporters or volunteers, you can set them up with the tools and messages to reach out to their own contacts and networks to engage and activate others. This is a powerful way to increase your reach and engagement because the messenger is already trusted and has influence over their peer group, so you don’t have to start by building that trust and influence yourself.

{% callout title="Building a WhatsApp Audience" %} In Malaysia, [BERSIH 2.0 ](http://www.bersih.org/)has built a robust communications plan around the messaging application WhatsApp (see case study for more information). In order to build their list of WhatsApp subscribers, they make it easy and integrate it into all of their activities. People can find them proactively on the platform, but they also invite people to subscribe to updates, make signing up easy on their website, and offer to add anyone registering to attend a BERSIH 2.0 event to the WhatsApp list for updates and alerts. {% endcallout %}

## Contact Management for Email and Mobile Numbers

You’ll need to keep track of your contacts. The way you manage contacts will depend on the size and details of your list. If your list is very small, you can probably maintain it on a spreadsheet that contains relevant information like names, organizational affiliation, addresses, phone numbers, email addresses, and notes. Keep in mind some users may have multiple phone numbers. Be sure to limit access to this data to only necessary users, and store it on a secure, password-protected platform.

If your lists contain more than 200 contacts, you’ll want to use a contact management database that allows you to easily email or text your members, and track, search, and segment by any relevant activities, key words, types of organizations, addresses, and more.

Common contact management platforms (sometimes called a CRM for customer relationship manager) include but are not limited to CiviCRM, Constant Contact, MailChimp, NationBuilder, Action Network, and others. Such platforms vary in price based on how many contacts you plan to store, whether you plan to contact people by email and/or SMS, whether you need to integrate sign up forms into your website, what data you hope to track, and other factors. As you decide on what CRM to use, be sure to plan ahead for growth of your communications program and ask about capacity and features that you may need a year or two from now, not just your immediate needs. Also be sure to consider the security of the platform, and protect any CRM accounts with long, complex passwords and two factor authentication.

## Social Media

Social media’s biggest distinguishing factor is its ability for two-way communication. You aren’t just pushing things out in one direction as you are with broadcast media or a website, but people have the ability to engage with you and your content. This can be both an advantage and disadvantage, and you should weigh the risks of people responding to your content negatively against the benefits of positive reach, engagement, sharing, and collaboration.

Because of the growing use and reach of social media among many audiences, you will likely find it worth it to have a presence on at least one platform. However, you should have a plan in place to combat trolls or bad actors who find and engage negatively with your content on social media. _(See Chapter IX on crisis communications for more information about planning for bad actors.)_ You should also take steps to secure all social media accounts to prevent hacking from potential adversaries. This includes requiring the use of two-factor authentication, enforcing use of strong passwords, limiting the number of account users with administrative privileges, and establishing a system for quickly removing account access for those who leave the organization.

### _Facebook_

Depending on what region of the world you are working in, Facebook is the most likely place you’ll want to spend your time, based on its widespread use globally. Facebook has both _pages_ and _groups_, and you can use either based on what you are trying to accomplish.

Groups can be open or closed, moderated or not. Think through what you’ll use the group for and what the privacy settings should be before you start a group. Do you trust people to post content without a moderator? Can group members invite new members themselves? Should the group’s content be visible to the public or only to group members? Each answer will have an impact on content, reach, engagement, and safety of group members, and those decisions should be made based on both your strategy and the external environment you are operating within. Facebook groups tend to feel more informal and intimate, and are often much more interactive. Group members can post or submit their own content to share, and Facebook will prioritize group content in members’ feeds and alerts.

If you decide to create a Facebook page for your organization instead of or in addition to a group, you will be the sole publisher of that content. Facebook shows your content to a fraction of your followers based on its ever-changing algorithm, and it can be hard to deduce exactly what will have wide reach or strong engagement. For that reason, it’s important to be nimble and creative with your Facebook content, and responsive to what the data and analytics tell you (_see next section_). The kind of content that succeeds on Facebook might not be what you’d expect or even what you would prefer. But keep trying n new ways of presenting your information until you find what works. Remember to stay on message even as you experiment with content -- if your content has wide reach and engagement but is off message, you haven’t actually helped your cause or your progress toward your goals.

{% callout title="When to Create Multiple Facebook Pages" %} In Ukraine, [OPORA](https://www.oporaua.org/en) maintains one [main Facebook page](https://www.facebook.com/cn.opora/) that features content that is in line with the organization’s main message. When it launches different campaigns and initiatives with more specific goals, it also creates a separate Facebook page for each, so people can easily follow and access the more specific and narrow content about that particular initiative. {% endcallout %}

Facebook accommodates text, links, images, and video. It excels in particular at visual content -- pictures and photo albums, graphics and infographics, produced or live video. When planning your Facebook strategy be sure to include lots of visual content. If your group operates in a closing or closed political environment, however, make sure to use caution when posting videos and/or photos of people and whether it might expose them to security risks, such as intimidation, harassment, or retribution.

Pay attention to the types and messages of the content that gets the most engagement (likes, comments, and shares). Track it over time to see what content your audience responds to.

You can also try posting several versions or presentations of the same data. Because only a fraction of your followers will see a given post, you don’t risk them seeing the same thing many times, but you gain valuable insights about which graphic or type of presentation gets the most engagement and understanding from your audience, and you can model future content on what you learn.

Facebook tends to prioritize content that spurs comments and dialogue, showing it to more people in their newsfeeds. To encourage people to comment and engage, reply to questions or engage with commenters -- when they are commenting in good faith. If you get the sense that commenters are fake, bots, or repeating talking points designed to harm your credibility, you may want to hide or block those accounts. Otherwise, if people come to your page with honest questions or misunderstandings, take the time to reply and engage them in dialogue. This will not only help to educate people about your work and mission, but people like to be heard and know that there is a real person behind the organizational presence.

{% callout title="Using Facebook Effectively" %} For Malaysian civic organization [BERSIH 2.0](), [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/BERSIH2.0/) is their primary social media platform. While they have a small presence on Twitter and Instagram, they have chosen to invest the bulk of their time and resources into Facebook, especially video for Facebook. They have seen a lot of engagement with their use Facebook Live for events in particular, where around 2,000 people will be tuned in to their live streams at any given time. (Their “get out the vote” Facebook Live had a high of 11,000 live views.)

Because it’s a small organization, BERSIH 2.0 struggles to be consistent with their Facebook posting and content. They’d prefer to have a more active and intense presence on the platform, but have had to scale back their involvement to ensure that all work is completed, including work on competing media strategies. {% endcallout %}

##  